
# 10.013 Modelling and Analysis

## Table of contents
- [10.013 Modelling and Analysis](#10013-modelling-and-analysis)
  - [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Course Overview](#course-overview)
    - [No homework](#no-homework)
    - [Terminologies](#terminologies)
    - [Exams](#exams)
  - [Week 1: Review of Functions](#week-1-review-of-functions)
    - [Set and Interval notation](#set-and-interval-notation)
    - [Functions](#functions)
    - [Combining Functions](#combining-functions)
    - [Difference Quotient](#difference-quotient)
    - [Symmetries of graphs](#symmetries-of-graphs)
  - [Week 2-1: Representing Functions](#week-2-1-representing-functions)
    - [Types of functions](#types-of-functions)
      - [1. Polynomial functions](#1-polynomial-functions)
      - [2. Rational Functions](#2-rational-functions)
      - [3. Algebraic Functions](#3-algebraic-functions)
      - [4. Exponential Functions](#4-exponential-functions)
      - [5. Trigonometric Functions](#5-trigonometric-functions)
      - [6. Piecewise Functions](#6-piecewise-functions)
      - [7. Power Functions](#7-power-functions)
      - [8. Root Functions](#8-root-functions)
    - [Inverse Functions](#inverse-functions)
      - [Understanding Inverse Functions](#understanding-inverse-functions)
      - [One-to-One Functions](#one-to-one-functions)
    - [Logarithmic Functions](#logarithmic-functions)
    - [Log-log and Semi-log](#log-log-and-semi-log)
      - [Semi-log graphs](#semi-log-graphs)
      - [Log-log graphs](#log-log-graphs)

---

## Course Overview
### No homework
### Terminologies
1D project: 1 Dimensional; Only includes concepts from the course (Due: 13/11 18:00)

2D project: Apply concepts taught in <strong>ALL</strong> term 1 courses (Due: 2/12 18:00)

### Exams
1. NO calculators
2. 1 A4 helpsheet (double sided)
3. Midterm focuses on week 1 -6
4. Finals focuses on week 8 -13

---

## Week 1: Review of Functions
### Set and Interval notation
- A set: an unordered collection of objects, defined between "{}"
- Union: all elements in both sets
- Intersection: elements common to both sets

*If not specified, assume x is a real number

### Functions
- Domain: all possible inputs (x)
- Range: all possible outputs (y)
A graph represents a function if and only if every vertical line intersects the graph <strong>at most once</strong>

Square root refers to the principal square root (assume positive root), if unspecified

### Combining Functions
- Composite functions: f(g(x))

### Difference Quotient
- Secant line: a line that passes through 2 points on a curve

### Symmetries of graphs
- Even function: f(-x) == f(x) (Symmetric about the Y-axis)
- Odd function: f(-x) == -f(x) (Symmetric about the origin)

If the graph is symmetric about the x-axis, there is more than one output value for an x-value, therefore its not a function :)

---

## Week 2-1: Representing Functions
### Types of functions

#### 1. Polynomial functions
A polynomial function is a function that is defined by a polynomial expression. So a polynomial function of degree n is a function of the form

$$ p(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + ... + a_1x + a_0$$

Where $a_n \not ={0}$

#### 2. Rational Functions
Rational functions are ratios of the form $f(x) = p(x)/q(x)$ where $p(x)$ and $q(x)$ are polynomials. 
Because division by 0 is prohibited, the domain of a rational function is the set of al real numbers except for which the denominator is 0.
(The graph approaches an asymptote when approaching denominator of 0)

#### 3. Algebraic Functions
Algebraic functions are constructed using the operations of algebra: addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and roots. 
Exapmles of algebraic functions are $f(x) = \sqrt{2x^3 + 4}$ and $g(x) = x^{\frac{1}{4}}(x^3 + 2)$. 
In general, if an even root (square root, 4th root, etc.) appears, then the domain does not contain points at which the quantity under the root is negative.

#### 4. Exponential Functions
Exponential functions have the form $f(x) = b^x$ where $b \not ={1}$ and $b > 0$. 

If $b > 1$, $y = 2^x$, the graph will increase exponentially as $x$ increases when $x>0$.
As $x$ decreases when $x < 0$ the graph will approach $y=0$ ($y=0$ is a horizontal asymptote).
This is an example of exponential growth.

If $0 < b < 1$, $y = (\frac{1}{2})^x$, the graph will approach $y = 0$ ($y = 0$ is a horizontal asymptote).
As $x$ decreases when $x < 0$, $y$ will increase exponentially in the positive.
This is an example of exponential decay.

#### 5. Trigonometric Functions
The trigonometric functions are $\sin{x}, \cos{x}, \tan{x}, \cot{x}, \sec{x}, \cosec{x}$. 
The functions $\sin{x}$ and $\cos{x}$ have a domain $(\infty,\infin)$ and the range $[1,-1]$

#### 6. Piecewise Functions
A function may have different definitions on different parts of its domain.
For example, income tax is levied in tax brackets that have different tax rates.
Functions that have different definitions on different parts of their domain are called piecewise functions. 
If all pieces are linear, the function is piecewise linear.

#### 7. Power Functions
Special case of polynomial functions, they have the form of $f(x) = x^n$, where $n>0$ and $x > 0$. 
When $n$ is an even integer, the function values are non negative and the graph passes through the origin, opening upwards.
For odd integers, the power function has values that are positive when $x>0$ and negative when $x<0$. 

#### 8. Root Functions
Root functions are special cases of algebraic functions; they have the form:
$$f(x) = x^{\frac{1}{n}} = \sqrt[n]{x}$$
Where $n>0$

When $n$ is even, the domain and range consists of nonnegative values.
Their graphs begin steeply from the origin and flatten out as $x$ increases

By contrast, the odd root functions, the domain and range extends into negative values, encompassing all real $x$ values and their range is all real numbers.
Their graph passes through the origin, open upward for $x>0$ and downward for $x<0$ and flatten out as $x$ increases in magnitude.

### Inverse Functions
#### Understanding Inverse Functions
The inverse of a function is a rule that acts on the output of the function and produces the corresponding input. 
Written as: 
$$f^{-1}(x)$$
$$f^{-1} \not ={\frac{1}{f(x)}}$$
How to find the inverse of a one-to-one function:
1. Write $y = f(x)$
2. Solve this equation for $x$ in terms of $y$ (if possible)
3. Interchange $x$ and $y$. The resulting equation is $y = f^{-1}(x)$

Domain of $f(x)$ = Range of $f^{-1}(x)$<br>
Domain of $f^{-1}(x)$ = Range of $f(x)$

#### One-to-One Functions
Not all functions have inverses. Only one-to-one functions have inverses.
A function is one-to-one if and only if no horizontal line intersects its graph more than once.

### Logarithmic Functions
Inverse of exponentials, $f(x) = \log_b{x}$, the logarithmic function with base b

Properties of Logarithms
1. $\log_a{1} = 0$
2. $\log_a{a} = 1$
3. $\log_a{a^x} = x$
4. $a^{\log_a{x}} = x$

### Log-log and Semi-log
#### Semi-log graphs
y-axis is logarithmic while x-axis has a linear scale.
A semi-log graph is useful for graphing exponential functions.
When graphed on a semi-log graph, an exponential function, $y = ba^x$, 
will produce a straight line with gradient $\log{a}$ and y-intercept $\log{b}$.

#### Log-log graphs
Logarithmic scale on both x and y axis.
A log graph is useful for determining power relationships.
When graphed on a log-log graph, a power function, $y = ax^n$,
will produce a straight line with gradient $n$ and y-intercept $\log{a}$.


